Course Syllabus for "CHEM205: Spectroscopy"
-------------------------------------------

Spectroscopy is the study of the interaction between matter and
electromagnetic radiation.  Molecules respond to different types of
radiation in different ways, depending on the frequency (*?*) or
wavelength (?) of the radiation.  In General Chemistry, we studied
spectroscopy as a tool for explaining the quantum mechanical model of
the atom.  In that course, we learned that light is an electromagnetic
radiation of a wavelength that is visible to the human eye.  We also
learned that light, which exists in tiny “packets” called photons,
exhibits properties of both waves and particles, a characteristic
referred to as the wave-particle duality.  The quantized relationship is
defined as E = hv, where E is energy, h is Plank’s constant, and v is
frequency. Spectroscopy and spectrometry are often used in chemistry for
the identification of substances through the spectrum from which they
are emitted or by which they are absorbed.  The type of spectroscopic
technique is defined by the type of radiative energy used, the nature of
the response, or the nature of the material being studied.  In Organic
Chemistry, we used spectroscopy for structure elucidation of organic
molecules. Spectrometry is the spectroscopic technique used to assess
the concentration or amount of a given chemical species.  In Analytical
Chemistry, we studied spectroscopy primarily for measuring analyte
concentrations.  The instrument used for these types of measurements is
called a spectrometer, spectrophotometer, or spectrograph. This
one-semester course is designed to provide you with a more thorough
description of the theory behind each spectroscopic technique as well as
its applications.  The course is meant to build upon itself, and each
unit requires a working knowledge of the material from preceding units. 
The first unit covers mass spectrometry (MS).  It is followed by a unit
on ultraviolet and visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis) and its application to
structural information in addition to analytical techniques.  The third
unit deals with infrared spectroscopy (IR), where you will practice
using the combination of the first three spectroscopic methods to obtain
structural information of organic molecules.  The final unit comprises
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.  In this unit you will be
required to combine concepts from all spectroscopic techniques
discussed.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able
to:  
  

-   Discuss similarities and differences between spectrometry and
    spectroscopy.
-   Identify the basic components of spectroscopic instrumentation.
-   Demonstrate a working knowledge of mass spectroscopy (MS),
    ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, infrared (IR)
    spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
-   Describe how a mass spectrometer produces its spectral patterns.
-   Explain the information obtained from a UV-Vis spectrophotometer and
    how it can be used for analysis.
-   Illustrate the mechanisms that give rise to the infrared absorption
    bands and identify to which functional groups each correspond.
-   Demonstrate an understanding of the processes responsible for NMR
    chemical shifts and splitting patterns.
-   Elucidate the structures of organic molecules from spectral data. 

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.,
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Be competent in the English language.  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook.](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf)  
  
 √    Have completed all
“[Prerequisites](http://www.saylor.org/majors/chemistry)” of the
Chemistry discipline ([CHEM001: Introduction to
Mechanics,](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem001/) [CHEM002:
Introduction to
Electromagnetism](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem002/), [CHEM003:
Single-Variable Calculus I](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem003/), and
[CHEM004: Single-Variable Calculus
I](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem004/)).  
  
 √    Have completed General Chemistry I & II
([CHEM101](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem101/) &
[CHEM102](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem102/)), Organic Chemistry I
([CHEM103](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem103/)), and Analytical
Chemistry ([CHEM108](http://www.saylor.org/courses/chem108/)) as listed
in “[The Core Program](http://www.saylor.org/majors/chemistry)” of the
Chemistry discipline. 

### Course Information

Welcome to CHEM205: Spectroscopy. General information about this course
and its requirements can be found below.  
    
 **Course Designer:** [Dr. Rachel
Lerebours](http://www.saylor.org/faculty-h-n/#DrRachelLerebours)  
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course comprises a range of different free,
online materials. However, the course makes primary use of the
following:  

-   Central Connecticut State University: Dr. Neil Glagovich’s
    [Spectroscopy](http://www.chemistry.ccsu.edu/glagovich/teaching/316/index.html)
-   OCHem.com: Thomas Poon’s
    [Tutorials](http://ochem.jsd.claremont.edu/tutorials.htm)

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned material.
All units build on previous units, so it will be important to progress
through the course in the order presented.  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final Exam.
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the assessments in this course.   
  
 In order to *pass* this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
on the Final Exam. Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as
you complete it. If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.   
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately 101 hours to complete. Each unit includes a time advisory
that lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit
and assignment. These time advisories should help you plan your time
accordingly. It may be useful to take a look at the time advisories
before beginning this course in order to determine how much time you
have over the next few weeks to complete each unit. Then, you can set
goals for yourself. For example, Unit 1 should take you approximately 29
hours to complete. Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and
decide to complete Subunit 1.1 (a total of 5 hours) on Monday night,
Subunit 1.2 (a total of 4 hours) on Tuesday night, etc.  
    

